hey everyone welcome back losla
montgomery here with china history
podcast episode 211.
part four this time in our overview of
the history of the jewish refugees in
china
we're still in the lead up to world war
ii let's get back to the story 1938
1939 european jews were looking
everywhere for escape routes and
most places had no vacancy but shanghai
starting end of 1937
and getting in was like walking across
the border into nogales mexico
nobody was checking after more chaos
than usual descended on shanghai
starting in august 1937 with the
commencement of the battle of shanghai
many government services and authorities
sort of went on hiatus
i mean nobody's at war yet except china
and japan
hitler hadn't invaded poland yet pearl
harbor was still years away
and even though the japanese could have
wiped out all the foreign powers
combined
nobody was firing on anybody as far as
the international settlement and
french concession went the soviets and
the japanese
still had their non-aggression pact so
russian jews
got to piggyback on that little
convenience of history for the time
being
everyone wanted to appear neutral and in
fact often went
out of their way to exhibit this
neutrality in front of the japanese
let's talk a bit about the relationship
between the jews and the japanese
government
in december 1938 the five ministers
conference was held in tokyo
one of the upshots of that assembly was
it was agreed that japan should avoid
actively embracing the jews or overtly
trying to help them
especially those expelled by their
allies i.e
germans and austrians on the other hand
they also agreed that to deny them entry
to japan would be an affront to the
nation's long-standing ideal of
racial equality the japanese could have
strictly
followed orders from berlin but they had
their own ideas about the jews
they didn't share the nazi hatred of
jews
and strange as it may seem their
interest in the jews
as a race was impacted a good deal by
their belief in the protocols of zion
that
first saw the light of day in 1903
i mentioned that in part one i think the
russian czar's secret police
back at the turn of the century composed
this document that
well basically lays out the case that
proves
jews control the world media banks
all wealth in the world jews are at the
top
pulling all the strings influencing all
global events
well that whole notion is sort of the
central theme in this
protocols of the learned elders of zion
not a small number of japanese officials
as i said
they ate this up and there were those in
japan that gave this serious study
and to prove they weren't wrong they
could point to the russo-japanese war in
1904-1905
not so well known was the fact that
japan did not have the armaments
or financial wherewithal to fight russia
they were in need of some major
financing and they were having all kinds
of trouble
funding their military ambitions
but one night the guy in charge of
arranging all this financing
takahashi korekiyo he found himself at a
dinner party
seated next to a man named jacob h
schiff
jacob schiff was managing director back
then of loeb and company
that name doesn't mean much today but
think of them as the goldman sachs of
their day
a successful and powerful investment
banking house
schiff was loeb's son-in-law
when jacob schiff was in his prime when
this was all happening
dawn of the 20th century the pogroms
as you recall from part one of this
series were going on all over russia
and schiff had gone on record repeatedly
expressing outrage that his fellow jews
and the banking business were so willing
to fund the tsar
he'd tell them the tsar is killing our
people
why are you lending them money so partly
i'm sure to turn a nice profit and
partly to stick it to the russian tsar
jacob schiff took the lead to get about
410 million dollars in funding for japan
to go fight the russians the bonds
sold through his firm loeb
sold like hotcakes he raised 180 million
dollars in the u.s alone
so japan got their funding and the rest
is history
from that moment in 1905 when they
emerged victorious against the russian
empire
japan sort of felt invincible and for a
while at least they were
so elements inside the japanese
government never
forgot what jacob schiff did for them
schiff was a jew and this sort of
validated their belief in the protocols
of zion in
some ways but as far as russia was
concerned they weren't happy at all
about what schiff did and there was some
blowback that affected russian jews
everywhere
and all those who said you see the jews
do control the world
i had a little ammo for future arguments
so it may have been
partly for this reason that the japanese
went somewhat easy on the jews
they worked with white russians and
fascist groups in china to
lean on the jews when they needed to but
the japanese government
and military they were always trying to
hedge their
bets with hopes that the perceived
economic power and geopolitical
influence of the jews
could be exploited to their benefit when
needed
including perceived jewish usefulness as
unofficial
conduits to the united states but as far
as japan
hating on the jews there was too much
goodwill there that existed from this
past history with jacob schiff so i
guess you could say the jews had to
eat the same humble pie as everyone else
who suffered under
japan's oppression but as far as an
innate
burning anti-semitism where the japanese
were concerned they didn't share the
german's passion
but by mid 1939 the number of jewish
refugees
showing up on the docks of shanghai was
starting to cause all kinds of concern
with the japanese authorities it got so
bad they had to make a formal request to
their german allies in august 1939
stop sending those jews to shanghai even
the japanese had to start thinking about
how to handle their own little
jewish problem and some within the
shanghai jewish community were thinking
i know that's our people but how many
more refugees can this place hold
some thought the whole community might
sink under the weight of dealing with
this crisis
that's how bad things got i know in the
context of the greater refugee crisis in
shanghai at the time
these numbers were small but within the
jewish community it was like a deluge
earlier in april 1939 the japanese
government formed a three-man committee
made up of representatives from the army
navy and foreign ministry the objective
was to come up with a
coordinated japanese policy on how to
handle
the sudden large influx of jewish
refugees as well as how to deal with the
other jews already living in china in
the japanese were still anxious to win
over the sassoons
and their fellow baghdadi jewish tycoons
along with the political influence they
still had at that time
they also wanted to keep close tabs on
shanghai's jews and keep them tightly
under their thumb
so this meeting was supposed to discuss
this issue
there was some interesting research
carried out about an idea
the japanese came up with that came to
be known as the fugu plan
one of these things that was never
proven japanese sushi aficionados know
fugu as the puffer fish
a true delicacy but if not properly
prepared
can kill you while you savor it a
metaphor for the jews in their minds
whatever the case the japanese took the
matter of policies towards jews in japan
and china very seriously
they really discussed it down to the
scientific level when you boiled it down
to the marrow
the general theme was jews could be
useful to japan
but handle with care the main idea
in this so-called fugu plan involved
resettling jewish refugees in manchukuo
and parts of hong kong where the
japanese were dominant that's in
shanghai
there's an argument about whether or not
this fugu plan ever existed but
you get the main idea i'll have a link
to a book on the subject in the show
notes i didn't i don't want to dwell on
it
uh too long but 1939 as far as jews
showing up in shanghai
this sudden influx of refugees was
without precedent
it was truly an act of human will to
survive
that allowed so many families to make it
to shanghai
i mentioned the acts of last episode
that
provided an avenue of escape well
too many have been led in the door and
resources were at the breaking point
three years earlier in 1936 sir victor
sassoon had built the embankment house
still there today known as the
khurbindasha 360 north sujo road
in shanghai when the jewish refugees
started arriving in the numbers that
they did
this building was their first stop as
soon as the ships docked in shanghai
trucks would be waiting for them as they
disembarked
and the jews would be herded onto the
back of these trucks you know like
pickup trucks
and they'd all pile on these families
carrying their
meager possessions which by this time
wasn't much
and in those open-air trucks they were
brought to embankment house
the first few floors of this seven-story
building
were converted into a receiving hall and
there
at embankment house they were fed
registered and given a place to flop
until they could be placed in any number
of tenements
owned by some of these jewish tycoons
in 1939 sir viktor sassoon had also set
up the embankment fund
to provide loans to these newly arrived
jews who were looking to hit the ground
running and set up a business or service
and you know who one of those tens of
thousands who found refuge in shanghai
during this desperate time
w michael blumenthal now if that name
sounds familiar
he was a secretary of the treasury under
president carter and that was his
signature on all the us dollar bills
from those days in the late 70s
michael blumenthal and his family had
left the port of naples in
april 1939. destination shanghai they
had fled their hometown just north of
berlin
and this future secretary of the u.s
treasury was 13 years old at the time so
he
has a very clear memory of growing up in
shanghai and has been one of the great
living witnesses to this period god
bless him 92 years old still going
strong
britain threw another log in the fire in
may 1939 when they put their foot down
regarding the
matter of jewish immigration of
palestine the majority arab populace
there
were fast on their way to becoming the
minority and as i mentioned previously
the great revolt had finally led britain
to put some traffic cones in front of
the
main entrance to palestine and 900 jews
trying to
find refuge in may 1939 on board the ms
st
louis with a great humanitarian and
unsung hero from the history of this
time gustav schroeder
captaining the vessel they sailed from
europe
and first tried to find refuge in heaven
cuba
no luck there so captain schroeder
sailed north
to roll the dice in the united states
and canada
a few were able to get off but almost
all of them
got turned down by the authorities in
both countries and had to sail back to
europe
some were able to get to france belgium
the netherlands but
most of the jewish passengers this
ill-fated voyage ended up in the
concentration camps and
most likely perished in the holocaust i
just saw
last month on november 17 2018 canadian
prime minister justin trudeau
79 years after the fact made a formal
apology for canada's refusal to
allow these jewish refugees of the ms st
louis to land there
so 1939 was a big year
and for the shanghai jews little vienna
was the center of it all located along
joshua road in the hong kong district
this was the jewish version of chinatown
it wasn't as nice as vienna but they
sure turned it into something familiar
it was a little piece of home brought to
shanghai
and something else like chinatown is to
none
chinese a destination a place to go see
and experience same in shanghai's little
vienna
local shanghainese would go there to
check the place out
stare at all the foreigners hustling
there maybe get a strudel or some
schnitzel you want to go see it for
yourself it's that part
of the city right by the shanghai jewish
refugees museum
that was ground zero for everything i'm
mentioning today
and to hong ko all these newly arrived
jewish refugees
went the british didn't want any more
in the international settlement the
french
same with them they had enough already
inside the french concession
the powers that be at the highest levels
of the
shanghai municipal government put their
heads together
and in the end everyone looked at the
richest jews in shanghai
including of course the big three the
sassoons
kaduri's and hardoons well they didn't
use these exact words but they were told
you know this is more your problem than
ours so you know you deal with it
time flew by as everyone argued the
merits of their idea about how
to best handle this matter the primary
objective was to stem the flow of jewish
refugees into shanghai
in the end the authorities in the
shanghai municipal council
argued this matter and it was agreed
that henceforth
a refugee in order to get on the other
side of the velvet rope
had to show when they landed in shanghai
that they had at least
400 per adult and a certain amount for
each child
in other words if you showed up broke
you'd be denied entry into shanghai
and remember last episode i mentioned
the german authority said 10 marks was
all you could leave with
if departing jews followed the german
regulation they'd show up in shanghai
with practically nothing
all these restrictions only applied to
german and austrian jews
only them in 1939 just those two groups
who had that j stamped on their passport
as of november 29th 1941 they were all
considered
stateless and jews without the j on
their passports
like the russian jews and those from
other countries they didn't have it as
bad
there were a few extra hoops for german
and austrian jews to jump through in
order to flee to the other side of the
world
and live in much reduced circumstances
anyone with a j
on their passport needed a permit to
book passage
and as i said last episode you still
needed that exit permit
if you couldn't secure one you had to
stay behind but if you could get that
exit permit
you could still get on a vessel to
shanghai but after hitler invaded poland
and world war ii kicked off september
no more ships sailing to shanghai that
slowed things down
profoundly most jews who hadn't made it
out by then
were running out of options but there
was something else that was
well very interesting to note from this
period even most jews don't know this
but in 1939
sunker also known as sunfo he tried to
champion
a plan to take in as many of these
jewish refugees in europe and place them
along with all the jewish refugee
overflow in shanghai
to a town along the yunnan burma border
sunka he's been mentioned in previous
episodes i believe in the
moisha two gun cones series he was the
son
of sanyat sen and sort of carried his
father's mantle after
son died so inconveniently in 1925
sosunka took the lead in trying to
settle these mostly
german austrian-jewish refugees flooding
into shanghai
this was a time of great upheaval in
china
the nationalist government was moving
the capital further up river to
chongqing
from hunco the japanese were bombing
like crazy
and into all this chaos in china you
know came this spike in jewish refugees
arriving in shanghai
sunka and other supporters of this plan
had this line of thinking that you know
help these jewish refugees out and
reap the pr rewards in the form of soft
power and
possible support for china from britain
in the u.s
some thought there might be something in
it for them later on
helping these jews out who had so much
economic clout and expertise and so many
necessary industries that china was
trying to develop
so in april 1939 the idea
to ship all these jews to the southwest
of china
along the yunnan burma border was
greenlighted
and a deal team was put together to come
up with a plan
someone proposed a special kind of
passport be
issued and distributed throughout
chinese embassies and consulates
in order to apply for this passport all
the jews had to do
was you know say yeah yeah yeah to a few
guamindang principles and promised to be
law abiding and that was it those who
were looking for an escape
route could use these passports to get
out of europe
and they'd be transported by vessels to
china via the suez canal
a pathway to citizenship was even
offered as far as the refugees already
in shanghai
the plan was to resettle them to this
place as well in this
town along the yuen burma border
was called tangchong located just west
of dali
in yunnan province well the reason this
got lost in the cracks of history
is because it never happened there were
a whole bunch of reasons but mainly they
were critics of the idea who argued the
government had better be careful
dealing with them jews you give them an
inch and the next thing you know
six feet would be gone and some pointed
to karl marx
said it wasn't he a jew wrote communist
manifesto in das capital
and what was the government supposed to
do later on when the jews in tung chong
started demanding autonomy so there was
sufficient enough pushback
and warnings made about the dangers of
giving all these rights to these jews to
kill the plan then on top of this early
to mid 1939
jiangkai shack wasn't looking to poke
his finger in hitler's eye
who it was well known didn't take kindly
to anyone
helping out the jews so in the end
this jewish enclave in tung chong with a
history going back to the han dynasty
it never happened wasn't meant to be but
imagine the possibilities of it had
tang chung by the way was the site of
the margaery affair of 1875.
augustus marguerite was a british
official
murdered in tang chung afterwards the
british used his murder to extract more
concessions out of china
in the form of the jir-fu convention
another one of the
unequal treaties of the day anyway david
leftman
the inspiration for that two-parter on
william mezny chp 177-178
just wrote a great article about the
marguerite affair and the diplomat
i'll have a link to that in the show
notes if you want to check that out
great footnote from history about this
almost
jewish stettle on the border of myanmar
in yunnan province in china up until
june 1940
the main avenue of escape from europe to
shanghai
was via lloyd tristino vessels lloyd
tristino was a grand old shipping
company based in trieste italy
they ran regular in charter services
between italy and shanghai
thousands and thousands of jews made it
out of europe alive
on these vessels during the height of
the exodus
they were running shuttles constantly
and you know this is just a small thing
but to show you the kind of things that
the jews had to put up with
due to their rather unique circumstances
all they needed was a one-way ticket out
of europe
but the booking companies would only
allow them to purchase round-trip
you know put the squeeze on when the
jewish passengers were most vulnerable
the reputation all over was that all the
jews had money and if you they wanted
your help there was nothing wrong in
shaking them down a little just one of
no doubt many examples of stumbling
blocks scams and
whatnot that european jews had to put up
with in their hour of desperation
so between 1939 1940 and into 1941
boatload after boatload of jewish
refugees
started pouring into the city of
shanghai arriving on these lloyd
tristino ocean liners
the city was already stuffed to the
gills with
chinese refugees from the countryside
and outlying areas
with foreigners from all over the world
not just jews were making a beeline for
shanghai
and since december 1937
a samurai sword of damocles was hanging
over the city
in other words it was already a very
tense situation when all these jewish
refugees were showing up in these
numbers
so for the rest of 1939 they tried to
figure out what to do
as more poured through the gates
like i said no one was slamming the door
shut in shanghai but after the invasion
of poland
in september the torrent of jewish
refugees coming to shanghai
slowed down to a trickle there was just
no way out
easy or difficult let's put the bookmark
in here my producer is glaring at me
through the window tapping his watch
we'll wind things up here and keep it
going with the story next episode
more to it believe it or not it's been
long enough so i think i could safely
say
himalaya has become my permanent podcast
app i started using it after meeting a
few of their
top execs and more than a month later
i'm already used to it
i dare say it's fast becoming the
official podcast app of the china
history podcast
go download it in the google or app
stores himalaya
the best kept secret in the podcast app
industry
try it out for all your history podcast
listening and other categories as well
they're part of shimalaya
the top podcast listening platform
in all of china they got more users
than the whole population of the united
states plus another 100 million
it's the whole population of the
philippines
hello gold mountain getting closer if
you live
anywhere near music town usa nashville
tennessee
once again let me give a major shout out
to my favorite gujang performer
and singer wufei along with the talented
and accomplished
mr chaneer ezra blumenkranz on the ode
backed up by vanderbilt university's own
chatterbird ensemble
they will soon be debuting hello gold
mountain
february 2019 at ingram hall vanderbilt
university
hello gold mountain a requiem for lost
possibilities of the jewish community of
shanghai
this original composition for chamber
orchestra was inspired by the actual
stories of those
jewish refugees who escaped to shanghai
during world war ii
hello goldmountain.com for more info
the donation page i keep talking about
i'm still in the talking about it stage
i'll let you know when it's up
thank you for everyone who keeps
offering okay i say that's enough psas
wouldn't you
that's it for part four i do believe we
can finish the series off in part six
either way laszlo montgomery here
signing off from los
angeles california begging you to please
not give up the ship just yet consider
coming back next time
if you please for another exciting
episode
of the china history podcast